.. role:: raw-html(raw)
   :format: html

The scene YAML file
===================

As already introduced in :ref:`The scene file of the initial example`, the
*scene* is an auxiliary external YAML file that contains a description of the
sources and associated spectra to be simulated.

YAML is a human-friendly data serialization language that can be easily
generated and modified with any text editor. See `YAML Syntax description
<https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/YAMLSyntax.html>`_
for more information.

.. warning::

   **Basic rules of YAML files:**

   - Indentation matters and plays an important part in structuring the data.

   - The number of spaces doesn't matter, as long as the child node indentation
     is greater that its parent. In any case, it is a good practice to keep the
     same number of spaces to define the indentation level.

   - Never use tabs outside of quoted strings, especially for indentation. The
     tab character is illegal within YAML files.

   - YAML is case sensitive.

   - YAML's comments start with a ``#`` and go until the end of the line.

The *scene* file may contain several sources, each one separated by a line
containing ``---`` (the end of directives marker in YAML). For each object, a
first level of keys must be specified:
``scene_block_name``, ``spectrum``, ``geometry``, ``nphotons``,
``apply_seeing``, ``apply_atmosphere_transmission`` and ``render``.

Here's a skeleton of a YAML scene file containing several sources (note that
``...`` indicates lines to be filled in; see explanation below):

.. code-block:: yaml

   scene_block_name: <string>
   spectrum:
     type: <string>
     ...
   geometry:
     ...
     ...
   nphotons: <number>
   apply_seeing: <True | False>
   apply_atmosphere_transmission: <True | False>
   render: <True | False>
   ---
   scene_block_name: <string>
   spectrum:
     type: <string>
     ...
   geometry:
     ...
     ...
   nphotons: <number>
   apply_seeing: <True | False>
   apply_atmosphere_transmission: <True | False>
   render: <True | False>
   ---
   ...

The following provides a detailed description of the different sections that
make up each block in a scene.

scene_block_name
----------------

The value of this first-level key is a user-defined text string. Its value has
no numerical effect on the execution of the simulator, but it allows the user
to see which astronomical source is being simulated at any given time in the
terminal. This is useful when the scene to be simulated contains multiple
sources. Ideally, the text string should not be repeated in different blocks,
although this has no impact.

spectrum
--------

This first-level key opens an indented section that contains all the
information required to define the kind of spectrum to be associated to the
geometry described below.

The following tabs show the different options available. In each case, a
general description and an example are provided.

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: constant-flux

      **General description**

      Note: The order of the different ``key: value`` pairs within the
      ``spectrum`` level is not relevant.

      .. code-block:: yaml

         spectrum:
           type: constant-flux
           wave_min: <float>    # optional (default value: null)
           wave_max: <float>    # optional (default value: null)
           wave_unit: <unit>    # optional (default value: m)

      Simulate spectrum with constant flux (in PHOTLAM units). This is the type
      of spectrum that we simulated in :ref:`The scene file of the initial
      example`.

      If ``wave_unit`` is not specified, the default FRIDA ``wave_unit`` is
      assumed (meter, which is the basic *irreducible* unit adopted in
      astropy). Otherwise, a valid astropy unit should be employed. Valid
      options are ``angstrom``, ``nm``, etc.

      Both ``wave_min`` and ``wave_max`` are optional. If they are not
      specified, the minimum and maximum wavelengths covered by the adopted
      :ref:`grating <--grating>` are used.

      **Example**

      Unless there is a specific need to use one of the optional parameters, in
      most cases it is sufficient to use:

      .. code-block:: yaml

         spectrum:
           type: constant-flux

   .. tab:: skycalc-radiance

      **General description**

      Note: The order of the different ``key: value`` pairs within the
      ``spectrum`` level is not relevant.

      .. code-block:: yaml

         spectrum:
           type: skycalc-radiance
           wave_min: <float>               # optional  (default value: null)
           wave_max: <float>               # optional  (default value: null)
           wave_unit: <unit>               # optional  (default value: m)

      This options simulates a spectrum that makes use of the predicted sky
      radiance (sky emission lines) obtained with `SKYCALC Sky Model Calculator
      <https://www.eso.org/observing/etc/bin/gen/form?INS.MODE=swspectr+INS.NAME=SKYCALC>`_
      (version 2.0.9) using the default input parameters for the model. The
      prediction is stored in the file ``skycalc_800-2600nm_step0_01nm.fits``,
      which is one of the auxiliary files automatically downloaded in a cache
      directory the first time ``fridadrp-ifu_simulator`` is executed.

      A plot of the sky radiance prediction is shown below.

      .. image:: plot_sky_radiance.png
         :width: 100%
         :alt: plot of the sky radiance

      Both ``wave_min`` and ``wave_max`` are optional. If they are not
      specified, the minimum and maximum wavelengths covered by the adopted
      :ref:`grating <--grating>` are used. If any of these parameters are used,
      it is also advisable to specify ``wave_unit``.

      **Example**

      Unless there is a specific need to use one of the optional parameters, in
      most cases it is sufficient to use:

      .. code-block:: yaml

         spectrum:
           type: skycalc-radiance

   .. tab:: tabulated-spectrum

      **General description**

      Note: The order of the different ``key: value`` pairs within the
      ``spectrum`` level is not relevant.

      .. code-block:: yaml

         spectrum:
           type: tabulated-spectrum
           filename: <string>              # mandatory
           wave_column: <integer>          # mandatory
           flux_column: <integer>          # mandatory
           flux_type: <string>             # mandatory (options: flam or photlam)
           wave_min: <float>               # optional  (default value: null)
           wave_max: <float>               # optional  (default value: null)
           wave_unit: <unit>               # optional  (default value: m)
           redshift: <float>               # optional  (default 0.0)
           convolve_sigma_km_s: <float>    # optional  (default 0.0)

      This option allows to simulate a spectrum whose flux is tabulated in the
      external ASCII file given in ``filename``, where the wavelength and flux
      are in different columns of the file (``wave_column`` and
      ``flux_column``, respectively). The file must be accessible from the
      directory where the simulator is running (a relative path to that
      directory can be specified).  In the simulation, the flux is evaluated
      using a simple linear interpolation of the tabulated data.

      In this case, it is important to specify ``wave_unit`` (otherwise the
      default value will be assumed, which may not correspond to the units
      employed in the tabulated data).

      It is possible to specify a redshift value to be applied to the tabulated
      wavelengths. In addition, it is also possible to convolve the spectrum
      using a Gaussian kernel with a standard deviation given by the
      ``convolve_sigma_km_s`` value (in km/s).

      Both ``wave_min`` and ``wave_max`` are optional. If they are not
      specified, the minimum and maximum wavelengths covered by the adopted
      :ref:`grating <--grating>` are used.

      **Example**

      .. code-block:: yaml

         spectrum:
           type: tabulated-spectrum
           filename: T06000G45P00.DAT
           wave_column: 1
           flux_column: 2
           flux_type: flam
           wave_unit: angstrom

   .. tab:: delta-lines

      **General description**

      Note: The order of the different ``key: value`` pairs within the
      ``spectrum`` level is not relevant.

      .. code-block:: yaml

         spectrum:
           type: delta-lines
           filename: <string>              # mandatory
           wave_column: <integer>          # mandatory
           flux_column: <integer>          # mandatory
           wave_min: <float>               # optional  (default value: null)
           wave_max: <float>               # optional  (default value: null)
           wave_unit: <unit>               # optional  (default value: m)

      This option is designed to simulate a spectrum formed by infinitely
      narrow emission lines (e.g., an arc spectrum). Note that although it is
      assumed that the lines have no spectral width, the use of a seeing value
      will broaden the observed profile of the lines in the spectral direction.

      In this case, it is important to specify ``wave_unit`` (otherwise the
      default value will be assumed, which may not correspond to the units
      employed in the tabulated data).

      Both ``wave_min`` and ``wave_max`` are optional. If they are not
      specified, the minimum and maximum wavelengths covered by the adopted
      :ref:`grating <--grating>` are used.

      **Example**

      .. code-block:: yaml

         spectrum:
           type: delta-lines
           filename: lines_argon_neon_xenon_empirical_EMIR.dat
           wave_column: 1
           flux_column: 2
           wave_unit: angstrom

geometry
--------

This first-level key opens an indented section that indicates how the photons
generated following the previous spectrum type are going to be distributed in
the IFU field of view.

The following tabs show the different options available. In each case, a
general description and an example are provided.

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: flatfield

      **General description**

      .. code-block:: yaml

         geometry:
           type: flatfield

      This option redistributes the photons homogeneously over the entire field
      of view of the IFU. It is the appropriate procedure to generate, for
      example, the contribution of sky emission.

      **Example**

      This case is very simple. There are no additional parameters.

      .. code-block:: yaml

         geometry:
           type: flatfield

   .. tab:: point-like

      Note: The order of the different ``key: value`` pairs within the
      ``geometry`` level is not relevant.

      **General description**

      .. code-block:: yaml

         geometry:
           type: point-like
           ra_deg: <float>             # optional (default value: 0.0)
           dec_deg: <float>            # optional (default value: 0.0)
           delta_ra_arcsec: <float>    # optional (default value: 0.0)
           delta_dec_arcsec: <float>   # optional (default value: 0.0)

      All the photons are initially placed at the same point of the field of
      view. The corresponding coordinates can be modified using ``ra_deg`` and
      ``dec_deg`` (right ascension and declination, in decimal degrees). In
      addition, it is also possible to include additional coordinate offsets
      using ``delta_ra_arcsec`` and ``delta_dec_arcsec`` (in arcseconds). It is
      important to remember that the coordinates at the center of the IFU field
      of view are the ones stablished by the script arguments :ref:`ra_teles,
      dec_teles <--ra_dec_teles>`, :ref:`delta_ra_teles_arcsec
      <--delta_ra_dec_teles>`, and :ref:`delta_dec_teles_arcsec
      <--delta_ra_dec_teles>`.  By default, all of the script arguments are set
      to zero. 

      In general, the simplest thing to do is to use the script arguments to
      set the reference position and use the scene parameters to relocate
      different sources as part of the same simulation.

      Even though the initial coordinates of all photons are the same, the
      final positions will be modified when the seeing effect is introduced.

      **Example**

      To simulate a point source at the center of the IFU's field of view,
      simply use the following (assuming that we have left the default values
      of the script arguments that modify the telescope pointing):

      .. code-block:: yaml

         geometry:
           type: point-like

   .. tab:: gaussian

      Note: The order of the different ``key: value`` pairs within the
      ``geometry`` level is not relevant.

      **General description**

      .. code-block:: yaml

         geometry:
           type: gaussian
           fwhm_ra_arcsec: <float>      # mandatory
           fwhm_dec_arcsec: <float>     # optional (default value: fwhm_ra_arcsec)
           position_angle_deg: <float>  # optional (default value: 0.0)
           ra_deg: <float>              # optional (default value: 0.0)
           dec_deg: <float>             # optional (default value: 0.0)
           delta_ra_arcsec: <float>     # optional (default value: 0.0)
           delta_dec_arcsec: <float>    # optional (default value: 0.0)

      This option redistributes the photons spatially in the IFU's focal plane
      following a two-dimensional Gaussian probability distribution, whose
      parameters are ``fwhm_ra_arcsec``, ``fwhm_dec_arcsec``, and
      ``position_angle_deg``.
      If the value of ``fwhm_dec_arcsec`` is not specified, the same value as
      ``fwhm_ar_arcsec`` is assumed.

      The position of the object in the field of view is determined by the same
      parameters as in the ``geometry: point-like`` case previously
      described.

      **Example**

      To simulate a symmetric Gaussian source at the center of the IFU’s field
      of view with a FWHM of 0.05 arcsec, simply use the following (assuming
      that we have left the default values of the script arguments that modify
      the telescope pointing):

      .. code-block:: yaml

         geometry:
           type: gaussian
           fwhm_ra_arcsec: 0.05

   .. tab:: from-FITS-image

      Note: The order of the different ``key: value`` pairs within the
      ``geometry`` level is not relevant.

      **General description**

      .. code-block:: yaml

         geometry:
           type: from-FITS-image
           filename: <string>                        # mandatory
           diagonal_fov_arcsec: <float>              # mandatory
           background_to_subtract: <string | float>  # mandatory (options for string: mode, median, none; or float number)
           ra_deg: <float>                           # optional (default value: 0.0)
           dec_deg: <float>                          # optional (default value: 0.0)
           delta_ra_arcsec: <float>                  # optional (default value: 0.0)
           delta_dec_arcsec: <float>                 # optional (default value: 0.0)

      This option allows the photons to be redistributed in the IFU's focal
      plane using an arbitrary FITS image as a probability distribution. This
      makes it easy to simulate objects with an arbitrary geometry. The
      ``diagonal_fov_arcsec`` parameter sets the size of the FITS image in the
      diagonal direction, in arcseconds. The position of the center of the
      image is fixed by the same parameters as in the ``geometry: point-like``
      case previously described.

      **Example**

      To simulate a galaxy like M51 at the center of the IFU’s field of view,
      simply use the following (assuming that we have left the default values
      of the script arguments that modify the telescope pointing):

      .. code-block:: yaml

         geometry:
           type: from-FITS-image
           filename: m51_dss1.fits
           diagonal_fov_arcsec: 0.80
           background_to_subtract: mode

      In this case, the file ``m51_dss1.fits`` is the FITS file downloaded from
      the `ESO Online Digitized Sky Survey <https://archive.eso.org/dss/dss>`_
      selecting ``Object Name: M51`` with a field of view of :math:`15 \times
      15\;{\rm arcmin}^2`. The image mode is subtracted and the resulting
      pixels with negative signal are set to zero in order to use the result as
      a valid probability distribution function. The size of the FITS image in
      the diagonal direction is reduced so that it occupies an extent of 0.80
      arcseconds in the IFU's focal plane.

nphotons
--------

The value of this first-level key indicates the initial number of photons to be
simulated.

If atmospheric transmission is considered in the simulation, a fraction of the
simulated photons will not reach the detector. This means that the final number
of simulated photons that reach the detector will be less than this initial
number.

Additionally, seeing can cause simulated photons on the edges of the IFU's
field of view to fall outside the IFU when this effect is taken into account,
which means that the final number of photons reaching the detector may be even
smaller.

apply_seeing
------------

Boolean first-level key indicating whether seeing must be taken into account.
If ``True``, each simulated photon is randomly displaced in the focal plane of
the IFU according to a probability distribution that is determined by the
seeing PSF.

The script arguments :ref:`seeing_fwhm_arcsec <--seeing_fwhm_psf>` and
:ref:`seeing_psf <--seeing_fwhm_psf>` define the
seeing FWHM and the mathematical function employed to reproduce the PSF. Note
that this arguments are ignored for those scene sources for which
``apply_seeing: False``.

apply_atmosphere_transmission
-----------------------------

Boolean first-level key indicating whether the atmosphere transmission must be
considered.  If ``True``, the atmosphere transmission defined in the script
argument :ref:`atmosphere_transmission <--atmosphere_transmission>` will be
used.

render
------

Boolean first-level key indicate whether the considered scene block must be
simulated. 

It may be useful to set this key to False when we want to simulate images
with several sources in the IFU field of view and one needs to
remove some particular objects from the simulation without deleting the
corresponding lines in the YAML file.
